"You can do a lot with like two Elixir developers." This is me misquoting Josh Price of Alembic, an Elixir consultancy, from my vague memory of a chat we had in Chattanooga after Gig City Elixir. The gist is that it is actually kind of dumb to do consultancy in Elixir because it is fundamentally quite productive and most companies don't need a lot of bodies. And the way people who run consultancies, like me, Josh Price, SmartLogic, DockYard, Mimiquate and others, make the most money is by contributing to inefficient and slow efforts at an hourly rate.

Note for the terminology-lovers (I am one), consultancies mostly provide contract workers for staff augmentation. There is usually less of the trve (as in black metal) consulting where you offe advice, expertise and so on. They are still called consultancies while individuals doing that work are often called contractors. I've never heard of a contractancy though it would often be honest. I'll note that Alembic has a true expertise in the Ash framework part of Elixir. I have a growing expertise in Nerves but my true expertise is in my connections, megaphone and wide know-how of the Elixir ecosystem. Some companies have used that well, some not.

Personally I prefer niche consulting where they need me to unlock, unblock or derisk something. But staff augmentation still pays the majority of my bills. That's a bit of transparency for you. Efficiency is in tension with billing. It shouldn't be. Because an efficient consultant should be appreciated but since it is actually hard to quantify and judge the quality of work over the short term companies just don't have any idea and the fundamental relationship is "do you like the person doing the work?", "is the work being done inoffensive to youi?" and "do you have a good relationship with the person managing the account?". Largely unrelated to the work.

I'm sure Josh prefers the Ash-focused consulting as well but it can't all be that and I believe they also do some JS-oriented work.

To show the non-consultancy side. I see a lot of 2-5 person startups doing Elixir and their problem is almost never head count. Their problems are product market fit, traction and profitability. The right problems for a startup or small business. The right concerns. The software just works. It does what it should. They don't have performance problems. They don't have challenges maintaining, scaling, designing or architecting. Of course you can get yourself into trouble with Elixir. Most people that choose Elixir has previous experience in making mistakes with Ruby or Python though so the ones I run into are surprisingly diligent and sane.

There are types of companies that need head-count for practical reasons. If you need to implement custom logic for every country/fiefdom you operate in and you operate everywhere. Suddenly you have a scale issue. But many businesses don't work that way.

I just see a lot of small Elixir teams knocking it out of the park. I haven't really paid it much mind. I don't like to focus on imagined threats to my business. I find it dull. But a recent conversation on the [Ship It!](https://changelog.com/shipit/133) podcast reminded me that companies are looking to reduce headcount and save money.

If consultancies are actively, mildly painfully, aware that the ecosystem they work in is not the best money-extraction machine that may be a valid signal for others that this is where you want to be. So I figured I'd share it.

As for me. I niche down to avoid success at all costs. Elixir too popular? How about embedded Elixir via Nerves? Still too much? I do security for embedded