We all have varying degrees of exposure to Big Tech. Some of it seems fine, stable and can be relied on. Some of it feels like shifting sand under your feet. React seems to move a lot on whims, I don't envy tracking that. Go seems like it might be fairly stable? With the current geo-political climate I don't find massive corporations to be a guarantee for stability. People may be getting fired even though they chose IBM. The world is wild right now.

There are programming languages that came up in the increasingly olden times before market penetration required corporate sponsorship. PHP, Python and Ruby all seemed to just take shape in the tech world as some kind of grassroots thing with a wide variety of users as stakeholders. That seems incredibly hard to do now and we have languages like Rust, Go and Swift that are supported by corporate entities until they achieve flight and usually beyond that. Mozilla is not a FAANG level megacorp but they certainly helped Rust take flight and now I hear Rust is beloved in Amazon *and* Microsoft.

There are still exceptions that come up. I think Zig is mostly community-driven and seems to have some traction. Not Rust levels of traction but definitely relevance. And my ecosystem of preference, Elixir, seemed to boost out of the Ruby world when Ruby was somewhat losing steam but still had a lot of momentum built up. It built on the power and reputation of Erlang combined with the niceties of Ruby and found some traction.

Elixir is controlled by the Elixir core team. If there is a corporate entity behind the core team it is Dashbit that employs a few of them and contributes massively to the wider Elixir ecosystem with Nx, Livebook and tons of various libraries. Dashbit is a small consultancy shop. They essentially offer high-profile Elixir developers as a subscription service. PR review, big picture assistance, emergency help.

Originally Elixir was developed at a company, Plataformatec. Hardly a massive corporation and it was acqui-hired by Nubank in a deal which left José Valim with the rights to Elixir. So we essentially have a BDFL model (benevolent dictator for life) which seems to serve the language well.

There is a wide variety of companies using Elixir but none of them have massive input or hold particularly much sway over the development of the language. Most of the development of the ecosystem happen thanks to the efforts of lots of volunteers. Some are supported, funded or helped by the companies they work at. Some are not. Some run their own business and make time for community work (hello!).

The biggest single corporation that has a massive impact on Elixir is Ericsson. Through Erlang/OTP. They fund the development of the foundations of the ecosystem of the BEAM virtual machine and all related parts. They get contributions from other large users, such as Meta. I don't gener